Date: April 21, 2025
Author: Dan Heck
Reading Time: 3 min 36 sec
Artificial Intelligence is transforming organizations and society in significant ways, but realizing the benefits while avoiding the risks is a complex endeavor in a rapidly changing world. The Understanding Group (TUG) helps organizations integrate artificial intelligence in a way that is coherent, effective, and consistent with their values, so that you can feel confident that you have a secure ethical and strategic grounding for change.
People struggle with change unless they feel a sense of control, of agency.
Our comprehensive Aligned Groups Framework fosters agency by focusing on three key imperatives: cultivating human agency, communicating holistically, and reflecting on whole creative processes. This structured approach to AI Ethics builds good governance and management processes that give your teams confidence they are leveraging AI in ethically consistent ways.
The Aligned Groups Framework can be localized to reflect your own organizational ethics and values, and enables your organization to produce a wide range of ethical governance and management products efficiently, including evaluation rubrics, strategic roadmaps, implementation playbooks, and governance documents that seamlessly integrate practical and ethical considerations.
An example of TUG’s Aligned Groups Framework at work can be seen in the ETHOS framework which UNICEF applied in a humanitarian setting. ETHOS provided a practical system for UNICEF to evaluate their AI implementation decisions against established ethical principles. Our framework has been a core contributor to their successful doubling production of educational modules for humanitarian workers, through a process that uses AI in structured ways but maintains careful expert human review. By providing a shared vocabulary and understanding, the framework reduces friction in day-to-day operations, and reduces the need for ad hoc “should I do this?" ethical questions.
We would love to discuss more about how TUG can help you develop a resilient, flexible, and ethical strategy for AI integration, governance and management in your organization.
For more information on our services see: https://understandinggroup.com/ai-services
or contact us at clarity@understandinggroup.com